Upgrade 5.6 (#2042)
openmicroscopy/ome-documentation: omero/sysadmins/python3-migration.rst

Migration from OMERO 5.5 (Python 2) to OMERO 5.6 (Python 3)
===========================================================

.. warning::

  This is still a pre-release of OMERO 5.6. The instructions below
  are intended to help plan a migration path from your current OMERO
  installation. We suggest you **not** perform the migration on your
  production systems until the 5.6.0 release is ready.

Basic steps
-----------

1. Choose a platform and a python. If your current installation platform
   does not match one of the :doc:`recommended platforms <version-requirements>`,
   you may want to choose a new platform as your migration target. See
   `Choosing a platform`_ below.

> 2. Instal OMERO.server and OMERO.web *separately*. All instructions like

Reviewer: Install

   `OMERO.server`_ and `OMERO.web`_ below as well as the main installation
   :doc:`server <unix/server-installation>` and 
   :doc:`web <unix/install-web/web-deployment>` pages assume separate installations.
3. Once both have been installed, perform a
   :doc:`backup and restore <server-backup-and-restore>` procedure
   and test your installation against the copy of your data.

Choosing a platform
-------------------

We suggest Python 3.6. This is the default installation on the two recommended platforms,
CentOS 7 and Ubuntu 18.04.

Both 3.5 and 3.7 should work and are slated to have support added, but Python 3.6 has received

> the most tested during the migration.

Reviewer: the most *testing*

Once you have your installation in place, you will need to follow the upgrade
documentation. Again, if any of the above is not clear, please see the very
extensive information on the documentation page. If in doubt, start [HERE]
(where?)

OMERO.web
---------

Installing OMERO.web no longer requires downloading a package from
https://downloads.openmicroscopy.org. The first choice to make is
whether you want to continue the previous method or move to a `pip install`-only
installation. If you don't need the Java libraries, `pip install` is likely more
convenient.

The primary change is that it is now required to set the :envvar:`OMERODIR` variable
to specify where the OMERO installation lives. This defines where configuration
files and log files will be stored.

Create an installation directory. We suggest: /opt/omero/web
Create a virtualenv: e.g. `python -mvenv venv3`
On some platforms, you may need to use python3 -mvenv venv3.
We're preferring to not use system-site-packages at the moment.
Choose between:
Downloading the OMERO.py zip as previously and unpack.
We suggest: /opt/omero/web/OMERO.web
Running: pip install --pre omero-web
mkdir -p OMERO.web/etc/ OMERO.web/var/

> export OMERODIR=$PWD/OMERO.web/

Reviewer: This list covers 2 alternatives? Maybe needs bullet points or indenting to make that clearer.
Does ```mkdir -p OMERO.web/etc/``` not need to be ```mkdir -p OMERO.web/etc/grid/```?
```$PWD``` maybe ```$(pwd)```

Author: Yeah, this is part of the `wip`-ness I was talking about. Not sure how much to include on this page and how much to leave to the install pages.

Author: Simplified away all of these steps. May need to check that this page links to the most accurate point in the install & upgrade guides.

Migration to Python 3
=====================

.. warning::

  This is still a pre-release of OMERO 5.6. The instructions below
  are intended to help plan a migration path from your current OMERO

>   installation. We suggest you **not** perform the migration on your

Reviewer 2: ``you not`` -> ``you do not`` (missing verb)

>   installation. We suggest you **not** perform the migration on your

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  installation. Do **not** perform the migration on your
```

  production systems until the 5.6.0 release is ready.

Basic steps
-----------

> 1. Choose a platform and a python. If your current installation platform

Reviewer 2: ``...python.`` -> ``python version``

> 1. Choose a platform and a python. If your current installation platform

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Choose a platform and a python version. If your current installation platform
```

   does not match one of the :doc:`recommended platforms <version-requirements>`,
   you may want to choose a new platform as your migration target. See
   `Choosing a platform`_ below.
2. Install OMERO.server and OMERO.web *separately*. Though not necessary, all
   instructions like `OMERO.server`_ and `OMERO.web`_ below as well as the main
   :doc:`server <unix/server-installation>` and 
   :doc:`web <unix/install-web/web-deployment>` installation pages now assume
   that the two are in separate installations.
3. Once both have been installed, perform a
   :doc:`backup and restore <server-backup-and-restore>` procedure
   and test your installation against the copy of your data.

Choosing a platform
-------------------

> We suggest Python 3.6. This is the default installation on the two recommended platforms,

Reviewer 2: First sentence should say something about platform. Instead, it starts talking about python version. Slightly confusing considering the header of this section.

Maybe 
Whatever platform you finally choose, we would suggest you use Python 3.6.

> We suggest Python 3.6. This is the default installation on the two recommended platforms,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The two recommended platforms, CentOS 7 and Ubuntu 18.04, have Python 3.6 as default installation. Thus we suggest Python 3.6 as the preferred version of Python.
```

> CentOS 7 and Ubuntu 18.04.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

> Both 3.5 and 3.7 should work and are slated to have support added, but Python 3.6 has been

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Both Python 3.5 and 3.7 should work and are slated to have support added, but Python 3.6 has been
```

the focus of testing during the migration.

Similarly, other operating systems are slated for having support added, but help from the
community would be very welcome! Obvious next candidates are CentOS 8 and Ubuntu 20.04.

> Debian is more of an issue. Debian 9 is still on Python 3.5 and Debian 10 has moved to Ice 3.7

Reviewer 2: ``Debian is more of an issue.``` -> ``Regarding Debian, Debian 9 is still....``

> Debian is more of an issue. Debian 9 is still on Python 3.5 and Debian 10 has moved to Ice 3.7

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Regarding Debian, version 9 is still on Python 3.5 and Debian 10 has moved to Ice 3.7
```

> so neither is particularly well supported at the moment. We are examining workarounds like

Reviewer 2: ``particularly well supported`` -> new definition of support level ? Maybe this should say  simply ``not supported``

> so neither is particularly well supported at the moment. We are examining workarounds like

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
so neither is supported at the moment. We are examining workarounds like
```

> building Ice from source and/or building a .deb package.

Reviewer 3: > Debian 10 has moved to Ice 3.7
> ...
> We are examining workarounds like building Ice from source and/or building a .deb package.

This applies to [Ubuntu 18.04 as well](https://github.com/ome/zeroc-ice-ubuntu1804/) which we're officially supporting. Perhaps say something like "we are working on instructions for Debian 9 and 10" and not mention Python/Ice?

Reviewer 4: but we already have a solution in place for ubuntu18.04
We have instructions for Debian 9. Some features might not be tested and trigger bugs but It is generally working. @mtbc uses Debian9 and has not found anything obvious so far.

Author: What wording would you two suggest here?

Reviewer 4: ``Debian 9 is still on Python 3.5 and Debian 10 has moved to Ice 3.7``
* Split the sentence into 2
  * ``Debian 9 is still on Python 3.5, both server and web can be installed and run successfully. We are not aware of major issues. Some features or apps might not be fully working. Please let us know if you encounter any issue.``
  * ``Debian 10 has moved to Ice 3.7....``

Author: Think I've found a compromise. Pushing.

Other prerequisites
-------------------

OMERO's other prerequisites have not changed substantially but if you would like to take this
opportunity to move to the :doc:`recommended version<version-requirements>` for all requirements,
the current choices are:

- Ice 3.6 (non-optional)

> - Java 11

Reviewer 3: The Ansible omero-server role still uses the default openjdk (1.8.0), do you want me to update the role? `java-11-openjdk.x86_64` is available on CentOS 7.

Reviewer 4: omero-install has been upgraded I think the role should be upgraded too

Author: Agreed.

Author: Leaving @manics to look at the role and resolving this conversation.

> - Nginx 1.14

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Nginx 1.14 or higher
```
This made sense when we used fastcgi due to the tight coupling. Now that it's just a proxy I think whatever the distro provides (as long as it's at least 1.14) is fine.

- PostgreSQL 11

Other options
-------------

The installation walkthroughs provided in the documentation try to stick to a minimum installation.
The only requirements are an understanding of the Unix shell, the standard package manager for your
platform, and the regular Python distribution mechanisms.

However, more advanced installation mechanisms are available if you are interested and have familiarity
with the given mechanism:

- `Ansible roles <https://galaxy.ansible.com/ome>`_ are available for most installation steps. The primary
  roles, `omero-server` and `omero-web` have not yet been released and will need to be installed from
  GitHub.

> - A `conda channel <https://anaconda.org/ome>_` provides pre-built packages needed by OMERO if you are

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- A `conda channel <https://anaconda.org/ome>_` provides pre-built packages needed by OMERO if you prefer
```

> - A `conda channel <https://anaconda.org/ome>_` provides pre-built packages needed by OMERO if you prefer

Reviewer 2: formatting went wrong here 
![Screen Shot 2019-12-04 at 11 44 36](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2478303/70139927-81abb300-168b-11ea-83f6-cba9586e52d0.png)

> - A `conda channel <https://anaconda.org/ome>_` provides pre-built packages needed by OMERO if you prefer

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- A `conda channel <https://anaconda.org/ome>`_ provides pre-built packages needed by OMERO if you prefer
```

>   comfortable not using your platforms standard Python installation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  to use Anaconda/Miniconda instead of the Python distribution provided by your platform.
```

- `Docker images <https://hub.docker.com/u/openmicroscopy>`_ are also available. Both the `omero-server`
  and `omero-web` images are considered production quality.

Please get in touch at https://forum.image.sc/c/data if you have any questions.

OMERO.server
------------

The steps for an OMERO.server installation have not changed substantially.

Download the OMERO.server.zip as you would usually do, and unpack it under your

> installation directory. We suggest: file:`/opt/omero/server/OMERO.server`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
installation directory. We suggest: file:`/opt/omero/server/` and symlink the unpacked
directory to `OMERO.server`
```

Reviewer 4: That is not the case for omero-install we still have it under /home/omero
That will need to be adjusted

Reviewer 4: sorted in omeroweb-install and omero-install

We highly recommend a virtualenv-based installation for all of the Python
dependencies. Follow the :doc:`standard installation instructions <unix/server-installation>`
for your platform.
All instructions ...

Once you have your installation in place, you will need to follow the
:doc:`standard upgrade instructions <server-upgrade>`, working from
a *copy* of your data.

OMERO.web
---------

Although it is possible to also follow the previous installation steps
for OMERO.web, installation no longer requires downloading a package from

> https://downloads.openmicroscopy.org. If you choose to follow this route,

Reviewer 2: ``if you choose to follow this route...`` - spell out which route you mean - the previous sentence mentions two different routes.

> https://downloads.openmicroscopy.org. If you choose to follow this route,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
https://downloads.openmicroscopy.org. If you choose to follow this newly introduced route,
```

all requirements will be installed directly into the virtualenv for OMERO.web.
Instructions are available under :doc:`web-deployment <unix/install-web/web-deployment>`.

> The primary change is that it is now required to set the :envvar:`OMERODIR` variable

Reviewer 2: ``The primary change is `` -> ``Note that setting of OMERODIR variable is now required ....``

It is contentious (and not very relevant) what the "primary" change is - you need rather the reader to take note of this change.

> The primary change is that it is now required to set the :envvar:`OMERODIR` variable

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that setting of :envvar:`OMERODIR` variable is now required
```

to specify where the OMERO installation lives. This defines where configuration

> files and log files will be stored. Again, we suggest: file:`/opt/omero/web` as the

Reviewer 2: The sentence starting with ``Again`` - the path there could be better formatted, see screenshot below

![Screen Shot 2019-12-04 at 11 52 44](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2478303/70140513-c71cb000-168c-11ea-8d10-399a787fa4a8.png)

- sorry, I do not know what the right formatting is, so do not offer exact suggestion.

> files and log files will be stored. Again, we suggest: file:`/opt/omero/web` as the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
files and log files will be stored.  We suggest: file:`/opt/omero/web` as the
```

root for your installation.

> You will need to also follow the :doc:`upgrade guide <omeroweb-upgrade>`. In short,

Reviewer 2: ``You will need to also follow...`` - hardly, this says "you will need to do install and also upgrade" which is a misformulation I guess

> You will need to also follow the :doc:`upgrade guide <omeroweb-upgrade>`. In short,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you intend to upgrade, please follow the :doc:`upgrade guide <omeroweb-upgrade>`. In short,
```

Author: Since this is the _migration_ guide rather than the installation guide, you will need the documentation under upgrade. I'll suggest a different wording and we can iterate.

web upgrades should become much simpler since only a `pip install -U` of the appropriate
libraries should be necessary.

Plugins
^^^^^^^

Core OMERO.web plugins have been updated for Python 3 and pre-released to

> PyPI. This means that there versions end in ".devX" and will only be installed

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
PyPI. This means that their versions end in ".devX" and will only be installed
```
